docs/modules/languages/pages/kotlin.adoc, before:

= Writing Integrations in Kotlin

An integration written in Kotlin looks very similar to a Java one except it can leverages Kotlin's language enhancements over Java:

[source,kotlin]
----
from("timer:tick")
    .process { e -> e.getIn().body = "Hello Camel K!" }
    .to("log:info")
----

You can run it with the standard command:

```
kamel run example.kts
```

Camel K extends the Camel Java DSL making it easier to configure the context in which the integration runs using the top level _context_ block

[source,kotlin]
----
context {
  // configure the context here
}
----

At the moment, the enhanced DSL provides a way to bind items to the registry, to configure the components the context creates and some improvements over the REST DSL.

== Beans DSL

To register beans as you would do with a Camel registry you can use the Beans DSL

[source,kotlin]
----
beans {
    bean<org.apache.commons.dbcp2.BasicDataSource>("dataSource") { <1>
        driverClassName = "org.h2.Driver"
        url = "jdbc:h2:mem:camel"
        username = "sa"
        password = ""
    }

    bean("filterStrategy") { <1>
        org.apache.camel.support.DefaultHeaderFilterStrategy()
    }

    processor("myProcessor") { <2>
        it.getIn().body = "Hello"
    }

    predicate("myPredicate") { <3>
        false
    }
}
----
<1> bind beans to the context for the database and filter strategy
<2> define a custom processor to be used later in the routes by ref
<3> define a custom predicate to be used later in the routes by ref


== Components Configuration

Components can be configured within the _components_ block inside the _camel_ one:

[source,kotlin]
----
camel {
    components {

        component<SedaComponent>("seda") { //<1>
            queueSize = 1234
            concurrentConsumers = 12
        }

        component<SedaComponent>("mySeda") { // <2>
            queueSize = 4321
            concurrentConsumers = 21
        }

        component<LogComponent>("log") { // <3>
            setExchangeFormatter {
                e: Exchange -> "" + e.getIn().body
            }
        }
    }
}
----
<1> configure the properties of a component whit type _SedaComponent_ and name _seda_
<2> configure the properties of a component with type SedaComponent and name _mySeda_, note that as _mySeda_ does not represent a valid component scheme, a new component of the required type will be instantiated.
<3> configure the properties of the component whit name _log_

[NOTE]
====
As for Groovy, you can provide your custom extension to the DSL
====

== Rest Endpoints

Integrations REST endpoints can be configured using the top level _rest_ block:

[source,kotlin]
----
rest {
    configuration { // <1>
        host = "my-host"
        port = "9192"
    }

    path("/my/path") { // <2>
        get("/get") {
            consumes("application/json")
            produces("application/json")
            to("direct:get")
        }
    }
}
----
<1> Configure the rest engine
<2> Configure the rest endpoint for the base path '/my/path'

Commit message:

chore(doc): kotlin warning
Ref https://github.com/apache/camel-k/issues/4738

docs/modules/languages/pages/kotlin.adoc, after:

= Writing Integrations in Kotlin

WARNING: the DSL is temporarily not supported in version 3.2.0 due to a bug in the Kotlin dependencies. As a workaround you may forcefully include `org.apache.camel:camel-kotlin-dsl:4.1.0-SNAPSHOT` dependency until the level of support is recovered.

An integration written in Kotlin looks very similar to a Java one except it can leverages Kotlin's language enhancements over Java:

[source,kotlin]
----
from("timer:tick")
    .process { e -> e.getIn().body = "Hello Camel K!" }
    .to("log:info")
----

You can run it with the standard command:

```
kamel run example.kts
```

Camel K extends the Camel Java DSL making it easier to configure the context in which the integration runs using the top level _context_ block

[source,kotlin]
----
context {
  // configure the context here
}
----

At the moment, the enhanced DSL provides a way to bind items to the registry, to configure the components the context creates and some improvements over the REST DSL.

== Beans DSL

To register beans as you would do with a Camel registry you can use the Beans DSL

[source,kotlin]
----
beans {
    bean<org.apache.commons.dbcp2.BasicDataSource>("dataSource") { <1>
        driverClassName = "org.h2.Driver"
        url = "jdbc:h2:mem:camel"
        username = "sa"
        password = ""
    }

    bean("filterStrategy") { <1>
        org.apache.camel.support.DefaultHeaderFilterStrategy()
    }

    processor("myProcessor") { <2>
        it.getIn().body = "Hello"
    }

    predicate("myPredicate") { <3>
        false
    }
}
----
<1> bind beans to the context for the database and filter strategy
<2> define a custom processor to be used later in the routes by ref
<3> define a custom predicate to be used later in the routes by ref


== Components Configuration

Components can be configured within the _components_ block inside the _camel_ one:

[source,kotlin]
----
camel {
    components {

        component<SedaComponent>("seda") { //<1>
            queueSize = 1234
            concurrentConsumers = 12
        }

        component<SedaComponent>("mySeda") { // <2>
            queueSize = 4321
            concurrentConsumers = 21
        }

        component<LogComponent>("log") { // <3>
            setExchangeFormatter {
                e: Exchange -> "" + e.getIn().body
            }
        }
    }
}
----
<1> configure the properties of a component whit type _SedaComponent_ and name _seda_
<2> configure the properties of a component with type SedaComponent and name _mySeda_, note that as _mySeda_ does not represent a valid component scheme, a new component of the required type will be instantiated.
<3> configure the properties of the component whit name _log_

[NOTE]
====
As for Groovy, you can provide your custom extension to the DSL
====

== Rest Endpoints

Integrations REST endpoints can be configured using the top level _rest_ block:

[source,kotlin]
----
rest {
    configuration { // <1>
        host = "my-host"
        port = "9192"
    }

    path("/my/path") { // <2>
        get("/get") {
            consumes("application/json")
            produces("application/json")
            to("direct:get")
        }
    }
}
----
<1> Configure the rest engine
<2> Configure the rest endpoint for the base path '/my/path'
